Adding Source Spec. (#1856)
knative/eventing: docs/spec/sources.md

# Sources

A **source** is any resource that generates or imports an event and relays that
event to another resource on the cluster via CloudEvents. Sourcing events is
critical to developing a distributed system that reacts to events.

A Source:

> - Represent an off or on-cluster system, service or application.

Reviewer: `Represents` ?

Reviewer: I am not sure if the _source_ itself does represent that system, service or app.

I usually tell people that with a source, you are able to connect to a 3rd party system, service or app - living on the cluster or somewhere outside.

Author: you are right, it should be `Represents the request for events from...`

- Produces or imports CloudEvents.
- Sends CloudEvents to the configured **sink**.

In practice, sources are an abstract concept that allow us to create declarative
configurations through the usage of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) extending

> Kubernetes. Those CRDs are instantiated by creating a instance of the resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes. Those CRDs are instantiated by creating an instance of the resource.
```

> It is up to the implementation of the source author to understand the best way

Reviewer: Source Author: a persona ?

to realize the source application. This could be as 1:1 deployments inside of
Kubernetes per resource, as a single multi-tenant application, or even an
off-cluster implementation; or all combinations in-between.

There are some guidelines on implementing sources to allow cluster operators and
tools to dynamically discover and understand source installations.

## Source CRDs

> CRDs that are to be understood as a `source` must be labeled:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CRDs that are to be understood as a `source` MUST be labeled:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  labels:
    duck.knative.dev/source: "true" # <-- required to be a source.
```

> CRDs should be added to the `sources` category:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CRDs SHOULD be added to the `sources` category:
```

> CRDs SHOULD be added to the `sources` category:

Reviewer 3: I suppose that the to yaml should make one file, this section is confusing to me.

Reviewer: I actutally do appreciate the breakdown of the different sections. This is a spec - not a tutorial.

```yaml
spec:
  names:
    categories:

>       - sources

Author: I don't feel like knative should be required for all sources

```

<!-- TODO(n3wscott,nacho): document the registry reqirements.

### Event Type Registry

To be included in the event type registry:

```yaml
todo
```
-->

## Source RBAC

> Knative leverages am aggregated RBAC role to allow for controllers to check the

Reviewer 4: am?

Reviewer: an ;-)

status of source type resources.

> The `source-observer` account looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`source-observer` ClusterRole](../../config/200-source-observer-clusterrole.yaml) looks like:
```

```yaml
# Use this aggregated ClusterRole when you need read "Sources".
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: source-observer
aggregationRule:
  clusterRoleSelectors:
    - matchLabels:
        duck.knative.dev/source: "true"
rules: [] # Rules are automatically filled in by the controller manager.
```

> And new sources should include a ClusterRoleBinding as part of installing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And new sources MUST include a ClusterRole as part of installing
```

a cluster:

```yaml
kind: ClusterRole
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: foos-source-observer
  labels:
    duck.knative.dev/source: "true"
rules:
  - apiGroups:
      - example.com
    resources:
      - foos

>       - foos/status

Author: does an observer need to see the finalizers?

    verbs:
      - get
      - list
      - watch
```

## Source Resource Shape

The minimum definition of the Kubernetes resource shape is defined in the
[Source](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/duck/v1beta1#Source)
ducktype.

### duck.Spec

The `spec` field is expected to have the following minimum shape:

```go
type SourceSpec struct {
    // Sink is a reference to an object that will resolve to a domain name or a
    // URI directly to use as the sink.
    Sink apisv1alpha1.Destination `json:"sink,omitempty"`

    // CloudEventOverrides defines overrides to control the output format and
    // modifications of the event sent to the sink.
    // +optional

>     CloudEventOverrides *CloudEventOverrides `json:"ceOverrides,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Is `CloudEventOverrides` too long?

Author: what would you rather have it be called?

Author: My opinion and why I made it `ceOverrides` is that it does feel too much to type `cloudEventOverrides` in the yaml and cloudevents uses `ce-` as the prefix for attributes. So It felt on brand and shorter.

Reviewer 5: btw, is it really most of the time an _override_ or isn't more often an _addition_ to the existing CloudEvent ? For me _override_ implicitly implies erasing all the original values but that's not always the case, isn't it ?

What about `ceAdditions` (or `ceAddon`) or `ceModifications` as overriding is only a potential side effect for existing keys ? 

But as it seems that this naming has been already settles in `knative/pkg` may its too late to change (so just mentioning that 'override' typically means something different to me.

Author: I thought of this, but if it is just additions and there is a conflict, the original should win. In this case the override wins. So it is an override. It happens to be overriding empty extensions. 

The ceOverrides is a holder for a whole class of things we might want to adjust on the source impl side. we are _overriding_ the default settings.

Reviewer 5: You are right, "addition" is not the proper name. But maybe _ceExtension_ like in OOP when a class extends another one, it also overrides same-named methods but also adds additional methods ?  So one could view this mechanism more like an inheritance mechanism, where the source's CE is the base and can be extended by the customer provided attributes ....

Reviewer 6: Talking with Scott, I think `ceOverrides` is right for the following reasons:

* For the correlated-Source-and-Trigger case (e.g. base FaaS scenario), this attribute will be needed to set up the correlation. Therefore, this attribute will often be set on custom objects, so we should prefer a shorter name.
* Since these values can **overwrite** existing extension data if misused, a name like "overwrite" or "override" gives a hint of the risk to application data, akin to a warning label on a set of knives.

# Sources

A **source** is any resource that generates or imports an event and relays that
event to another resource on the cluster via CloudEvents. Sourcing events is
critical to developing a distributed system that reacts to events.

A Source:

- Represents an off or on-cluster system, service or application that produces
  events to be consumed by a sink.
- Produces or imports CloudEvents.
- Sends CloudEvents to the configured **sink**.

In practice, sources are an abstract concept that allow us to create declarative
configurations through the usage of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) extending
Kubernetes. Those CRDs are instantiated by creating an instance of the resource.
It is up to the implementation of the source author to understand the best way
to realize the source application. This could be as 1:1 deployments inside of
Kubernetes per resource, as a single multi-tenant application, or even an
off-cluster implementation; or all combinations in-between.

There are some guidelines on implementing sources to allow cluster operators and

> tools to dynamically discover and understand source installations.

Reviewer 7: This section sets up the following ones quite nicely. I'd expand on this just a little more only because source installation is only one part, the other part is instantiating a source (CRD vs. CR) in which case you want to convey additional information (in the Status of the resource as described below). So, we might try to expand on this explanation a bit.

Author: I added a little intro section. Let me know what you think.

## Source CRDs

> CRDs that are to be understood as a `source` MUST be labeled:

Reviewer 7: Let's expand a bit on this. It would be maybe be useful to include the motivation here, for example, so support the Source in the listing (for example kubectl get ... command). So in addition to MUST be labeled, why would be helpful. Understood is just a bit of a vague term here.

Author: expanded!

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  labels:
    duck.knative.dev/source: "true" # <-- required to be a source.
```

CRDs SHOULD be added to the `sources` category:

```yaml

> spec:

Reviewer 7: We should mention consistent use of the Conditions and in particular the one Ready condition that we have defined in the apis.ConditionReady and probably add that as a recommended additional Printer Column for consistency?

Author: Added.

  names:
    categories:
      - sources
```

> 

Reviewer 7: We should also talk about the validation aspects and encourage proper Description for the fields and so forth also?

Author: added.

<!-- TODO(n3wscott,nacho): document the registry reqirements.

### Event Type Registry

To be included in the event type registry:

```yaml
todo
```
-->

## Source RBAC

Knative leverages an aggregated RBAC role to allow for controllers to check the

> status of source type resources.

Author: Added some more use cases.

ducktype.

### duck.Spec

The `spec` field is expected to have the following minimum shape:

```go
type SourceSpec struct {
    // Sink is a reference to an object that will resolve to a domain name or a
    // URI directly to use as the sink.
    Sink apisv1alpha1.Destination `json:"sink,omitempty"`

    // CloudEventOverrides defines overrides to control the output format and
    // modifications of the event sent to the sink.
    // +optional
    CloudEventOverrides *CloudEventOverrides `json:"ceOverrides,omitempty"`
}
```

For a full definition of `Sink` and `CloudEventsOverrides`, please see
[Destination](https://godoc.org/knative.dev/pkg/apis/v1alpha1#Destination), and
[CloudEventOverrides](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/duck/v1beta1#CloudEventOverrides).

### duck.Status

The `status` field is expected to have the following minimum shape:

```go
type SourceStatus struct {
    // inherits duck/v1beta1 Status, which currently provides:
    // * ObservedGeneration - the 'Generation' of the Service that was last
    //   processed by the controller.
    // * Conditions - the latest available observations of a resource's current
    //   state.

>     Status `json:",inline"`

Reviewer 7: We should probably mention here about the apis.ConditionSet and each Source IMHO should have the apis.ConditionReady as the one way to look at the readiness of the Source.

Author: I added this but also a source could be a batch style so might have `Succeeded` state.

# Sources

A **source** is any resource that generates or imports an event and relays that
event to another resource on the cluster via CloudEvents. Sourcing events is
critical to developing a distributed system that reacts to events.

A Source:

- Represents an off or on-cluster system, service or application that produces
  events to be consumed by a sink.
- Produces or imports CloudEvents.

> - Sends CloudEvents to the configured **sink**.

Reviewer 4: At some point we will have to say something about error handling: what happens when sink failed to receive events.

Author: I am not sure the source spec can say. It depends on how durable you are and need to be.

              as the sink."
          ceOverrides:
            type: object
            description:
              "Defines overrides to control modifications of the event sent to
              the sink."
            properties:
              extensions:
                type: object
                description:
                  "Extensions specify what attribute are added or overridden on
                  the outbound event. Each `Extensions` key-value pair are set
                  on the event as an attribute extension independently."
```

### Event Type Registry

The Event Type Registry is a feature that allows for software to find all CRDs
labeled as a `Source` ducktype, and extract the defined
[EventType](https://godoc.org/knative.dev/eventing/pkg/apis/eventing/v1alpha1#EventType)s
that could be emitted from a source instance.

To be included in the event type registry a fake `registry` component is defined
in the `openAPIV3Schema` section inside the CRD. It is not our intention to have
cluster operators create resources with this filled out, it is to signal to
other software some metadata about the runtime/dataplane characteristics of this

> type of source.

Reviewer 5: As laid out in https://github.com/knative/eventing/issues/1550#issuecomment-519791678 I still think that this approach is very hackish, and e.g. "misusing" the `pattern` schema pattern field fon non-pattern like (e.g. non-ECMA 262 regular expressions).

IMO everything specified in a schema should be part of an instance (i.e. being an instance variable which can be set by a user, not used as a static enum-type without meaning).

Author: Good points, I had missed this discussion. I agree that it needs more discussion, I commented out the section but did not deleted it yet. Let's talk more. Thanks for bringing it up.

Reviewer 5: As proposed in https://github.com/knative/eventing/issues/1550#issuecomment-532722794 and  https://github.com/knative/eventing/issues/1550#issuecomment-532723930 moving the registry meta-data to annotations would make much sense. Would this be something which should be changed here or should the change be postponed to a later version of this spec ?

Author: let's address the registry as a followup so we can talk about it more as an independent feature.

Reviewer: @rhuss should we move this forward? Or dont feel this is "ready" ?

Reviewer 6: It seems like any mention of a registry could be a follow-on PR.

Maybe remove this commented section from the PR and follow up in a separate PR addressing #1550?

Author: Removed and added a comment pointing to #1550

                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.add"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                deleteResource:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.delete"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                updateResource:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.update"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                ...
```

## Source RBAC

Sources can by any shape and are expected to be extensions onto Kubernetes. To
prevent cluster operators from re-deploying, or re-creating RBAC for all
accounts that will interact with sources, Knative leverages aggregated RBAC
roles to dynamically update the rights of controllers that are using common

> service accounts provided by Knative. This allows Eventing controllers to to

Reviewer 4: to to -> to

Author: what do you have against 💃? 🤣

# Sources

> A **source** is any resource that generates or imports an event and relays that

Author: I want it to be general, the Kubernetes object is not important. A valid source impl would be config in k8s and a control that exposes an endpoint in the cluster, plus some remote config to hit that endpoint.

> A **source** is any resource that generates or imports an event and relays that

Author: ah, you are right, I take it back, The _source_ is the k8s object, and it represents some larger system.

event to another resource on the cluster via CloudEvents. Sourcing events is
critical to developing a distributed system that reacts to events.

A Source:

- Represents an off or on-cluster system, service or application that produces
  events to be consumed by a sink.
- Produces or imports CloudEvents.

> - Sends CloudEvents to the configured **sink**.

Author: Defined a sink.

configurations through the usage of Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) extending
Kubernetes. Those CRDs are instantiated by creating an instance of the resource.
It is up to the implementation of the source author to understand the best way
to realize the source application. This could be as 1:1 deployments inside of
Kubernetes per resource, as a single multi-tenant application, or even an
off-cluster implementation; or all combinations in-between.

For Kubernetes Operators, there are two states to sources:

1. A source CRD and controller (if required) have been installed into the
   cluster.

   A cluster with a source CRD installed allows the other operators in the
   cluster to find and discover what is possible to source events from. These
   CRDs define the credentials, input parameters, k8s categories, event types,
   duck types, and aggregated RBAC roles required to interpret the source as the
   source author expects. This topic is expanded upon in the
   [Source CRDs](#source-crds) section.

1. A source custom object has been created in the cluster.

   Once a cluster operator creates an instance of a source and provides the

>    necessary credentials, input parameters, and event sink, the source

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   necessary parameters, the source
```

   controller will realize this into whatever is required for that source for
   the current situation. While this resource is running, a cluster operator
   would like to inspect the resource without needing to be fully aware of the
   implementation. This is done by conforming to the [Source]() ducktype. This
   topic is expanded upon in the [Source Custom Objects](#source-custom-objects)
   section.

> The goal of requiring CRD labels and running resource shapes is to aid in

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The goal of requiring CRD labels and running resource shapes is to enable
```

discovery and understanding of potential sources that could be leveraged in the

> cluster, and sources that exist and are running in the cluster.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
cluster. This structure also aids in understanding sources that exist and are running in the cluster.
```

The comma here suggests that you're trying to comma-splice two sentences; reading it that way makes my brain hurt.

## Source CRDs

Sources are more useful if they are discoverable. Knative Sources MUST use a

> ducktype label to allow controllers and operators the ability to find which CRDs

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
standardized label to allow controllers and operators the ability to find which CRDs
```

I don't think the label is a duck type here.

are considered to be adhering to the
[Source](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/duck/v1#Source) ducktype.

CRDs that are to be understood as a `source` MUST be labeled:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  labels:
    duck.knative.dev/source: "true" # <-- required to be a source.
```

> Labeling sources in this way allows for cluster operators to list CRDs and

Reviewer 6: s/cluster operators/developers/

> filter on which ones are choosing to adhere to the source ducktype. To make this

Reviewer 6: I think this would be clearer to say "allows developers to list sources by filtering the list of CRDs:"

query,

```shell
kubectl get crds -l duck.knative.dev/source=true
```

CRDs SHOULD be added to the `sources` category:

```yaml
spec:
  names:
    categories:
      - sources
```

By adding to the sources category, we give an easy way to list running sources

> in the cluster with,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
in the cluster with:
```

                severity:
                  type: string
                status:
                  type: string
                type:
                  type: string
              required:
                - type
                - status
          sinkUri:
            type: string
```

Please see
[SourceStatus](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/duck/v1#SourceStatus)
and [Condition](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/#Condition) for
more details.

Sources SHOULD provide OpenAPI validation for the `spec` field. At minimum
sources SHOULD have the following,

```yaml
validation:
  openAPIV3Schema:
    properties:
      spec:
        type: object
        required:
          - sink
        properties:
          sink:
            type: object
            description:
              "Reference to an object that will resolve to a domain name to use
              as the sink."
          ceOverrides:
            type: object
            description:
              "Defines overrides to control modifications of the event sent to
              the sink."
            properties:
              extensions:
                type: object
                description:

>                   "Extensions specify what attribute are added or overridden on

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
                  "Extensions specify what attributes are added or overridden on
```

                  the outbound event. Each `Extensions` key-value pair are set

>                   on the event as an attribute extension independently."

Reviewer 5: "extension attribute" instead of "attribute extension" ?

>                   on the event as an attribute extension independently."

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
                  on the event as an extension attribute independently."
```

```

> <!-- 

Reviewer 8: <!--whitespace-bot-->
Remove trailing whitespace:
```suggestion
<!--
```

        registry:
          type: object
          description: "Internal information, users should not set this property"
          properties:
            eventTypes:
              type: object
              description: "Event types that ApiServerSource can produce"
              properties:
                addResource:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.add"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                deleteResource:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.delete"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                updateResource:
                  type: object
                  properties:
                    type:
                      type: string
                      pattern: "dev.knative.apiserver.resource.update"
                    schema:
                      type: string
                ...
```
-->

## Source RBAC

> Sources can by any shape and are expected to be extensions onto Kubernetes. To

Reviewer 7: nit: be any shape

> Sources can by any shape and are expected to be extensions onto Kubernetes. To

Reviewer 6: Do we really think they can be **any** shape, or do we expect them to have TypeMeta, ObjectMeta, Spec and Status?

> prevent cluster operators from re-deploying, or re-creating RBAC for all

Reviewer 6: I don't understand the "re-deploying, or re-creating"

Do we mean duplicating?

> accounts that will interact with sources, Knative leverages aggregated RBAC

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
accounts that will interact with sources, cluster operators should leverage aggregated RBAC
```

roles to dynamically update the rights of controllers that are using common
service accounts provided by Knative. This allows Eventing controllers to check
the status of source type resources without being aware of the exact source type
or implementation at compile time.

The
[`source-observer` ClusterRole](../../config/200-source-observer-clusterrole.yaml)
looks like:

```yaml
# Use this aggregated ClusterRole when you need read "Sources".
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: source-observer
aggregationRule:
  clusterRoleSelectors:
    - matchLabels:
        duck.knative.dev/source: "true"
rules: [] # Rules are automatically filled in by the controller manager.
```

And new sources MUST include a ClusterRole as part of installing themselves into
a cluster:

```yaml
kind: ClusterRole
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: foos-source-observer
  labels:

>     duck.knative.dev/source: "true"

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    duck.knative.dev/source: "true"  # Matched by source-observer ClusterRole
```

rules:
  - apiGroups:
      - example.com
    resources:
      - foos
    verbs:
      - get
      - list
      - watch
```

## Source Custom Objects

> The minimum definition of the Kubernetes resource shape is defined in the

Reviewer 6: I think you mean something like:

> All Source custom objects MUST implement the [Source ducktype]. Additional data in `spec` and `status` is explicitly permitted.

[Source](https://godoc.org/github.com/knative/pkg/apis/duck/v1#Source) ducktype.

### duck.Spec

The `spec` field is expected to have the following minimum shape:

```go
type SourceSpec struct {
    // Sink is a reference to an object that will resolve to a domain name or a
    // URI directly to use as the sink.
    Sink apisv1alpha1.Destination `json:"sink,omitempty"`

    // CloudEventOverrides defines overrides to control the output format and
    // modifications of the event sent to the sink.
    // +optional
    CloudEventOverrides *CloudEventOverrides `json:"ceOverrides,omitempty"`
}
```

> For a full definition of `Sink` and `CloudEventsOverrides`, please see

Reviewer 6: I think you mean "a golang structure definition" rather than "a full definition". I'd expect a full definition to be a documentation file explaining both the structure and rationale, rather than header docs.
